## Proof of concept anticheat implementation using machine learning to detect aimbot.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s50n1qt9JnI

## Project Directory explanation:
- data: csv files for training and testing
- gameFilesC++: the game files used for the unreal engine. This includes the anti-memory manipulation software, as well as sending telemetry data. 
- models: the testing and training python files. These implement pytorch to train and test the LSTM model
- static: the HTML page served to display the models predictions
- guide.py: unecessary file of a tutorial followed to learn about models
- telemetryAPI.py: The initial file for data collection that served as a FastAPI server. This served as a connection for the database and the unreal engine.
- telemetryLiveAPI: The live version of the api that serves a static html, and does feature augmentation before in real time feeding data into the model
- 
## Report:
Chapter 3: Game Dev


To implement an anticheat, a developed game is a prerequisite. Following the official Unreal First Person Shooter Tutorial, provided in their documentation, the tutorial walks the user through the basics of game development, and using the Unreal Engine. Unreal utilises the language C++, and by default connects to the IDE Visual Studio 2022. After the initial setup of creating a project, character creation was necessary to provide the user a medium to experience the game. Input mappings for directional and camera movement were then implemented for basic character movements, jumping, and turning the camera.These are simple controls to allow the user to control the character with “wasd”, the space bar, and the mouse, respectively. Then a mesh, a visible set of arms, were added to the character so the user is able to see themselves. This mesh is blocked from visibility, so anywhen viewing not from the character’s perspective, it is invisible. 

Then shooting mechanics were implemented. The tutorial implements a projectile based shooting, then collision. The temporary objects in the map would interact and be moved by the collision. The projectiles would then despawn after a preset time to save memory. To aim the shots, a heads up display class was implemented with a crosshair in the center of the screen. Lastly, character animation was implemented for the character. This included animating both movement, jumping and idle states. For stylization, an Egyptian styled map, and a weapon asset were imported, as these flush out the game.
This game development tutorial provided the foundational framework to implement an anticheat system, with some changes and enhancements. The first change was to add an enemy to shoot. The enemy class finds the controlling player, and navigates toward them at a set speed. The same skeletal mesh is provided to the enemy, so they are visible to the player. The enemy is given a health attribute as well, so the player is able to defeat them after a few shots. These enemies are spawned at periodic intervals by a separate enemy spawner class. 
Then it was necessary to augment the HUD class, adding an ammo counter. This ammo counter does not impact the gameplay, as there are no reload animations, or pauses, it simply acts as an on-screen text that displays a value that could be changed through hacking or adjusting memory values. The counter starts at 30, and each shot decrements by one.
To simplify data collection, the current projectile based system was replaced with hitscan, where instead of shooting a projectile that has “airtime”, hitscan sends an instantaneous “laser” from the center of the player's screen outwards. This will matter later when machine learning is implemented to simplify potential complexities.


Screenshot of the player shooting hitscan lasers into the sky.

The next changes are all made to the player class, and are extensive. When adding additional functions to this class, the main goal was to be able to provide telemetry data specific to aiming and shooting at the enemy for the machine learning aspect. Telemetry data as touched on before, is the data that is procured when the user interacts with the game. This can range from mouse and keyboard inputs, to the angle at which the user is looking. After reworking the shooting system to be hitscan, the fire function which controls this, deals damage to the enemy upon raycast contact. Then to send the telemetry data of the shot, the SendTelemetry function was implemented that delivers a payload to my local server. This function is called whenever the player shoots and hits an enemy. The payload is sent via an HTTP post request to an api endpoint, and is formatted as a JSON. The data that is saved to my local server is the player ID, the time of the shot, the pitch and yaw of the camera, and the x, y, and z coordinates relative to the enemy. This provides the means to harvest the data to form a “legitimate” dataset, with gameplay from a non-malicious actor.
 To procure the malicious actor gameplay, an “aimbot” class was developed. Aimbot as described before, is a cheat whereby the user can instantaneously, consistently aim, and shoot at the target with extremely high accuracy. In other words, the cheat finds the enemy, and retargets the player camera to always face and follow the enemy. The aimbot function finds the closest enemy to the player, gets the enemies location, and rotates the player’s camera to be always locked onto the enemy’s center point. Initially, the aimbot shot every frame as soon as possible, then shifted towards shooting at realistic random intervals, to simulate a human player. The “aimbot” dataset was then filled with these two kinds of cheating telemetry data. The data is enqueued into a FString to temporarily store the data, before being sent at periodic time intervals, to avoid overloading the server with data. This was necessary in the event data was being sent every frame, or extremely quickly.
 
Chapter 4: initial telemetry collection and processing

Prior to capturing the data from the player class post request, a method in which to receive and store the data was necessary. To solve this, a simple fastAPI application was developed. The application receives the shot data from the Unreal Engine client in real time, and receives the data. The application functions by instantiating a local SQLite database upon running, opening up port 8000, and effectively listening for incoming POST requests. The database stores the pitch and yaw of the player camera, the x, y, and z of where the shot landed on the enemy. Then the timestamp is saved and added to the database. This provides a real-time gathering of shot data. This data along with the timestamp can effectively recreate how the player is shooting the enemy, and can display behavioral patterns.

To make accessing the data easier, a few endpoints were created for the end user to view or download the data. These are viewed as the raw data in JSON format, or when downloading, the JSON is parsed downloaded as a CSV file. This is done to allow for easy feeding into the machine learning model, which comes later. Lastly, a static HTML page is served to display the machine learning results, which will be discussed later.


			A screenshot of the FastAPI Endpoint docs, with telemetry data.

The server’s role is to functionally support both data collection for legitimate and aimbot assisted gameplay. This data is concatenated, and marked as either aimbot or legitimate to aid in supervised machine learning, a critical step in building a live, real-time anti-cheat system. Overall, the application provides a simple backend for telemetry data capture that will be processed by the implemented machine learning model. 

Chapter 5: machine learning
To further enhance the cheat detection software, and utilize the collected telemetry data to determine cheating patterns, a machine learning model is necessary to implement. 
To properly analyze time related patterns, the model uses a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) architecture, designed for sequence modeling. When analyzing individual rows of this data one at a time, every shot on the enemy appears to be legitimate. There is no discrepancy from an honest player and malicious actor. LSTM is the perfect match when analyzing these patterns, as it can learn behaviours over sections of data, such as unnatural aim adjustments or consistent shot timing. Prior to passing the data into the model for training, the data needs to be normalized, then sequenced into groups of 10 based on the timestamp, then split into three different sets; training, validation and testing. Cross validation was implemented for temporal separation between training and evaluation data. This was to reduce overfitting to specific time segments. To further add features that aid in temporal analysis, determining variance and rate of change was necessary to be analyzed. In each group, for each chosen feature, the function calculates the rolling variance, rolling mean, and standard deviation. Then the delta values for the aim offset angles are calculated to determine acceleration in skew, which is an indicator for player legitimacy. 
Adding further model integrity, the LSTM is bidirectional, processing data in both forward and backward directions, to determine player aim and behaviour. Further reduction of overfitting included layer normalization and dropout layers. These stabilize training and reduce overfitting. The output layer produced raw logits, which were converted to probabilities that represent how probable aimbot was being used. During data collection data was skewed to have more aimbot values, so to correct this imbalance, a weighted loss function was implemented. This ensures the model equally values both the legitimate and aimbot aspects of the dataset. The model was trained using the adaptive moment optimizer, which uses momentum and RMSprop to adjust learning rates during training. Performance was measured using F1 score, to value both precision and recall.
The model was finally evaluated on a portion of the test set that was not introduced during training. It outputs confusion matrices, which indicate the performance for predicted values that are false positives, true positives, false negatives, and true negatives. The results of the training indicated a confidence of 95%, which indicated either: the model is overfitting the data, or the data is extremely obvious. The final model was then saved, and awaited testing on new data.
Before implementing the model into a real-time anticheat, the trained model was evaluated against new telemetry data that was gathered. This was to ensure that the model was not overfitting the initial data. The testing essentially replicated the same preprocessing methods from the training portion. This included rolling statistics, variance, acceleration metrics for aim offsets, and temporal deltas. These were then normalized similarly to avoid distribution shifts. When the model came to the prediction stage, there was a threshold of probability necessary to classify each group as legitimate or aimbot behavior. These predictions came out to a high confidence, at approximately 85% confidence over multiple tests. This indicates that the model is ready to be integrated into the real-time anti-cheat software.

Chapter 6: real-time machine learning
Since the model is trained and performs accurately on fresh data, the next step was to integrate the model into our FastAPI application. This would allow the game to communicate in a real-time environment. This was built off the initial FastAPI application that allowed the game to communicate and send telemetry data to the local server, with the model loaded and some added feature augmentation. 
Along with the database storing telemetry data, the backend also serves a static HTML page that displays the live predictions of the model. This page periodically updates every few minutes, and displays a table that holds the confidence level of the model’s belief that the user is aimbotting. These updates are scheduled in the background and query the last five minutes of telemetry data. After retrieving the data, the same features are calculated as before; the rolling variance, rolling mean, and delta offsets. The most recent prediction per player is stored in the predictions table, along with the probability score and is accessible via an endpoint.


Screenshot of the static HTML served to display predictions of the model.


This anti-cheat system functions in intervals of approximately 3 minutes, which is the average time the model spends predicting based on the available data. It runs continuously, with no manual inputs required. If this were deployed as a functional anti-cheat, features could be added to flag the player, or kick them from the game.


Chapter 7: anticheat implementation

Then I created an anti-cheat class. This class manages a few common cheat deterrence, such as memory manipulation, and using common cheat programs. To detect common cheat programs, the anti-cheat employs a function called EnumProcesses. This function is a Windows function, and is implemented using a specific library. EnumProcessModules is then called to get each process name and compare it to a list of known cheating software, such as “Cheat Engine”. If a match is found in the process names, the anticheat produces an in game warning, and logs this onto the screen.

 Along with scanning for processes, the anti-cheat software also uses XOR encryption. As mentioned previously, the variables “ammo count” are stored in memory using XOR encryption, then with an added checksum to detect any memory tampering. As a further implementation for extra security, a shadow variable is introduced, which should have the same value when compared to the original ammo count. This is checked periodically to ensure that there are no malicious actors tampering with memory.

When designing the anti-cheat software, deterrence and prevention are the main goals. The methods implemented will prevent common cheating methods such as external memory manipulation and the execution of known cheating software such as “Cheat Engine”. These methods combined with a live machine learning model make an effective combination of preventing tampering, and catching those who have found exploits.

The primary feature of the system is detecting running processes associated with known cheating tools. The function utilizes Windows Process Status API (PSAPI) via the EnumProcesses function, which retrieves a list of process identifiers for all currently running processes on the system. For each process ID returned, the class uses EnumProcessModules and GetModuleBaseName to extract the executable name of the process.These process names are then compared against a premade list of known cheat programs. If a match is found, a log is outputted to the console as proof of concept. 

Then to further prevent tampering, XOR obfuscation and encryption is implemented. As a visible exploitable feature, the ammo count will be the variable that is encrypted, since it is logged on the screen, any change in the memory will be displayed easily. Each ammo value is stored in memory encrypted with a XOR key then stored with a checksum. The checksum is used to further verify integrity. If the current memory checksum fails to match the stored checksum, the system flags the discrepancy as a potential malicious activity, and then logs it in the console. 

Lastly, the anti-cheat system maintains a shadow copy of the ammo count.The shadow count simply acts as the real ammo counter would, decrementing after each shot and is periodically compared against the real ammo variable. Any difference in these values are possible memory exploits.


Chapter 7: Pitfalls

There were a few challenges during the development of the anti-cheat system. The initial challenge was determining the sort of data that I needed to collect for a binary decision machine learning model. Previously, I had assumed that only legitimate telemetry was necessary for the model, but this was not the case. The model required both legitimate and cheated data to learn the patterns of both behavioural trends. To accomplish this, an aimbot feature was added to the game, where the telemetry for aimbot could be collected. Initially, the aimbot fired a shot every frame, resulting in a server overload. To fix this, the enqueue system was implemented, periodically sending short data over instead of instantaneously. After data collection was successful, I initially implemented a simple binary classifier with both a wide and deep model. When testing, the model’s accuracy was 47%, worse than flipping a coin to determine if the player is aimbotting. After further research the solution to this was to implement a Long Short-Term Memory model. This model focuses on temporal sequences, as opposed to specific features on a per row basis.



Chapter 8: Results

The combined anti-cheat system from both the deterrence system; anti memory tampering, and the real-time machine learning model make for a strong guard against malicious act
ors. Breaking down the individual components, the process scanning is an effective tool given that the predetermined list is comprehensive. This can be bypassed if the process is given a new name, but will cover generic cases. Memory protection such as XOR encryption, checksums, and shadow variable verification are consistent and standard countermeasures for an anti-cheat system. When testing on my game, altering the memory values for the ammo counter are consistently flagged, due to the redundancy of measures in place. 

The machine learning model performed strongly in identifying users with aimbot in real time. When playing with aimbot, the machine learning frequently predicted correctly, with a confidence of around 85%. When playing legitimately, the aimbot could easily detect it. This suggests a potential change in threshold for the model to be more sensitive when predicting aimbot. The model struggled to identify aimbot during transition phases, starting by playing legitimately, then switching on aimbot temporarily. This is the result of the prerequisite of gathering the past five minutes of data. These false negatives suggest the data be evaluated faster with smaller groups of data.

Overall, the integrated anti-cheat system demonstrates relatively high effectiveness in both prevention and detection. Combining memory manipulation and process deterrence alongside real-time anti-cheat software provides a strong defense against common cheating methods.
